Specification (#4)
kasiabulat/corefx: src/System.Text.Json/docs/writable_json_dom_spec.md

> # Writable JSON DOM for `System.Text.Json`

Reviewer: nit: State what the acronym means fully the first time it shows up in the doc (at least for not commonly known ones). 
```suggestion
# Writable JSON Document Object Model (DOM) for `System.Text.Json`
```

## Introduction

> `JsonNode` is modifiable, dictionary-backed API to complement the readonly `JsonDocumet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`JsonNode` is a modifiable, dictionary-backed API to complement the readonly `JsonDocument`.
```

> It is the base class for the following overloads representing all possible kinds of JSON nodes:

Reviewer: nit: To me, overloads doesn't seem like the right word here.
```suggestion
It is the base class for the following concrete types representing all possible kinds of JSON nodes:
```

* `JsonString` - representing JSON text value
* `JsonBoolean` - representing JSON boolean value (`true` or `false`)

> * `JsonNumber` - representing JSON numeric value, can be created from and converted to all possible numeric primary types

Reviewer: What's a primary type?

Maybe primitive or built-in: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/built-in-types-table
```suggestion
* `JsonNumber` - representing JSON numeric value, can be created from and converted to all possible built-in numeric types
```

* `JsonArray` - representing the array of JSON nodes
* `JsonObject` - representing the set of properties - named JSON nodes

It is a summer internship project being developed by @kasiabulat.

> ## Goals

Reviewer: Though good to have, this list looks more like a TODO rather than "Goals". I would expect the goals section to talk more about the motivation/problem being solved and what we want end-users to be able to do with this API.

Something like the following:
```text
- The user should be able to build up a structured in-memory representation of the JSON payload and modify it. That includes, remove, add, and update.
- This means we want to build a modifiable JsonDocument that is not just readonly.
```

**Edit:** Also querying the document object model. Please feel free to re-word/add to it as you see fit.

* Designing API
* Implementation of provided methods
* Tests of provided methods
* Documentation for public API

## Example scenarios
### Collection initialization

One of the aims in designing this API was the take an advantage of C# language features and make it easy and natural for delevopers to create instances of `JsonObject`s without calling too many `new` instructions. Below example shows how to initialize JSON object with different types of properties:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Do this to have github syntax highlight code samples:

```suggestion
```csharp
```

Repeat for all the samples.

    { "numbers", new JsonArray { 4, 123, 88 } },
    { "prime numbers", new JsonNumber[] { 19, 37 } },
    { "dishes", new JsonArray(dishes) },
    { "sports", new JsonArray(sports) },
    { "strange words", strangeWords.Where(word => ((JsonString)word).Value.Length < 10) },
};
```

### Modifying existing instance

The main goal of the new API is to allow users to modify existing instance of `JsonNode` which is not possible with `JsonElement` and `JsonDocument`. 

One may change the existing property to have a different value:
```
 var options = new JsonObject { { "use caching", true } };
 options["use caching"] = (JsonBoolean)false;
```

Add a value to existing JSON array or property to existing JSON object:
```
var bestEmployees = new JsonObject(EmployeesDatabase.GetTenBestEmployees());
bestEmployees.Add(EmployeesDatabase.GetManager());
```

Or modify the exisitng property name:
```
JsonObject manager = EmployeesDatabase.GetManager();
JsonObject reportingEmployees = manager.GetJsonObjectProperty("reporting employees");
reportingEmployees.ModifyPropertyName("software developers", "software engineers");
```

### Transforming to and from JsonElement

> The API allows users to get a writable version of JSON document from readonly one and vice versa:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API allows users to get a writable version of JSON document from a readonly one and vice versa:
```

> Transforming JsoneNode to JsonElement:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transforming JsonNode to JsonElement:
```

```
JsonNode employeeDataToSend = EmployeesDatabase.GetNextEmployee().Value;
Mailbox.SendEmployeeData(employeeDataToSend.AsJsonElement());
```

Transforming JsonElement to JsonNode:
```
JsonNode receivedEmployeeData = JsonNode.DeepCopy(Mailbox.RetrieveMutableEmployeeData());
if (receivedEmployeeData is JsonObject employee)
{
    employee["name"] = new JsonString("Bob");
}
```

### Parsing to JsonNode

> If developer knows he/she wil be modifying and instance, API provides the possibility to parse string rigth to `JsonNode`, without `JsonDocument` being an intermediary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a developer knows they will be modifying an instance, there is an API to parse string right to `JsonNode`, without `JsonDocument` being an intermediary.
```

```
string jsonString = @"
{
    ""employee1"" : 
    {
        ""name"" : ""Ann"",
        ""surname"" : ""Predictable"",
        ""age"" : 30,                
    },
    ""employee2"" : 
    {
        ""name"" : ""Zoe"",
        ""surname"" : ""Coder"",
        ""age"" : 24,                
    }
}";

JsonObject employees = JsonNode.Parse(jsonString) as JsonObject;
employees.Add(EmployeesDatabase.GetNextEmployee());
Mailbox.SendAllEmployeesData(employees.AsJsonElement());
```

> ## Desingn choices

Reviewer: Maybe add some notes around the following:
- Avoid any significant perf regression to the readonly implementation of JsonDocument and JsonElement
- Higher emphasis on usability over allocations/performance

> ## Desingn choices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Design choices
```

> * No advanced methods for looking up properties like `GetAllValuesByPropertyName` or `GetAllPrimaryTypedValues`, because they would be too specialized.

Reviewer: Consider adding a note about support linq style querying capability (could be future). You already added some of it in usage scenarios for creating.

> * `null` reference to node instead of `JsonNull` class.

Reviewer: Hmm... I see. What's the rationale for doing that?

Author: It just seemed redundant. Here's a comment addressing it: https://github.com/kasiabulat/corefx/pull/1#discussion_r304018769. 
And it is not possible to write `new JsonObject{ {"null_property", null} }`, because it's ambiguous, so it has to be `new JsonObject{ {"null_property", (JsonNode) null} }`

* Initializing JsonArray with additional constructors accepting `IEnumerable`s of all primary types (bool, string, int, double,  long...).

    Considered solutions:

    1. One additional constructor in JsonArray
    ```
    public JsonArray(IEnumerable<object> jsonValues) { }
    ``` 

>     2. Implicit operator from Array in JsonArray

Reviewer: Generally, when we have implicit operators, we tend to have named method as well (in accordance with the [Framework Design Guidelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/design-guidelines/)) since some languages do not work super well with implicit operators (like F#). So, solution 2 would only have been additive, not an alternative. Specifically: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/design-guidelines/operator-overloads, but @bartonjs can talk to that better.

Author: I added implicit operators for `JsonNumber` from numbers, `JsonString` from string and `JsonBoolean` from bool, but Array seemed to be magical and requiring too many checks and hacks.

    3. More additional constructors in JsonArray (chosen)
    ```
    public JsonArray(IEnumerable<string> jsonValues) { }
    public JsonArray(IEnumerable<bool> jsonValues) { }
    public JsonArray(IEnumerable<sbyte> jsonValues) { }
    ...
    public JsonArray(IEnumerable<double> jsonValues) { }
    ``` 

    | Solution | Pros | Cons | Comment |
    |----------|:-------------|:------|--------:|

>     | 1 | - only one additional method <br> - accepts collection of different types <br> - accepts IEnumerable <br> - IntelliSense | - accepts collection of not JsonNodes <br> - needs to check it in runtime  | accepts too much, <br> array of different primary types wouldn't be returned from method |

Reviewer: What do you mean by "IntelliSense"?

Author: Autocompletion and showing suggestions.

    | 2 | - only one additional method <br> - accepts collection of different types <br > | - works  only in C# <br> - no IntelliSense <br> - users may not be aware of it <br> - accepts only Array <br> - accepts collection of not JsonNodes <br> - needs to check it in runtime | from {1,2}, <br>2 seems worse |

>     | 3 | - accepts IEnumerable <br> - does not accept collection of not JsonNodes <br> - no checks in runtime <br> - IntelliSense | - a lot of additional methods <br> - does not accept a collection of different types | gives less possibilities than {1,2}, but requiers no additional checks |

Reviewer: `does not accept collection of not JsonNodes` <- what are you trying to say here? I am confused by "not JsonNodes".

Author: Not deriving from `JsonNode`, that is collection of anything, like for example `Exceptions`.

* No support for duplicates of property names. Possibly, adding an option for user to choose from: "first value", "last value", or throw-on-duplicate.
* Transformation API:
    * `DeepCopy` method in JsonElement allowing to change JsonElement and JsonDocument into JsonNode recursively transforming all of the elements
    * `AsJsonElement` method in JsonNode allowing to change JsonNode into JsonElement with IsImmutable property set to false
    * `IsImmutable` property informing if JsonElement is keeping JsonDocument or JsonNode underneath
    * `Parse(string)` in JsonNode to be able to parse Json string right into JsonNode if user knows he/she wants mutable version
    * `DeepCopy` in JsonNode to make a copy of the whole tree
    * `GetNode` and TryGetNode in JsonNode allowing to retrieve it from JsonElement

## Implementation details

> * `JsonNumber` value is stored as a `string`. 

Reviewer: Maybe add a note about possibly using Utf8String/Char8 (once they come online in the future), or byte[] as backing field rather than "UTF-16" strings. Also, would be worth mentioning expected/by-design performance characteristics/allocations, especially as more of it gets implemented.

Author: There's is a note about it in "Open questions", but I can add more details.

## Open questions
API:
* Do we want to add recursive equals on `JsonArray` and `JsonObject`?

> * Do we want to make `JsonNode`s derived types (and which) implement `IComperable`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Do we want to make `JsonNode`s derived types (and which) implement `IComparable`?
```

> * Would escaped characters be supported for creating `JsonNumber` from string? 

Reviewer: Do you have questions that are higher-level about the entire set of types and overall design? Maybe they will come up as more of the types are implemented.

For example, how would JsonNode, JsonElement interact?

Reviewer: Consider adding a note about semantics of duplicate and order preservation/control (when adding/removing values in JsonArray/JsonObject).

Author: I will be adding more questions as they appear. There are already some functions for JsonNode and JsonElement interactions. I added a note about duplicates in "Design choices" section, but I can mention in also in questions.

> 

Reviewer: Do we want to consider adding accelerator APIs like write a `JsonNode` to a `Utf8JsonWriter` without having to go through `JsonElement`?

Also, should `JsonNode` have a `JsonValueKind` property that a caller can inspect and cast to the right concrete type?

Let's say someone else passes a `JsonNode` to me, what can I do with it?

Author: I already added a function for acquiring `JsonNode` without going through `JsonElement`, but I can add those to questions so that we keep them in mind.

Implementation:
* Do we want to add a copy of `JsonWriterHelper.ValidateNumber` with additional checks?
* Do we want to store `JsonNumber` as `Span<byte>` instead of `string`? 

## Useful links

### JSON
* grammar: https://www.json.org/

> * specification: https://www.ecma-international.org/publications/files/ECMA-ST/ECMA-404.pdf

Reviewer: Would be good to add the specific RFC itself: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8259

### Similar APIs
`JsonElement` and `JsonDocument` from `System.Json.Text` API:
* video: https://channel9.msdn.com/Shows/On-NET/Try-the-new-SystemTextJson-APIs
* blogpost: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/try-the-new-system-text-json-apis/

> * performance: https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/issues/33115

Reviewer: You linked to the announcement issue. Why is this "performance"?

Author: There's a note on the need for high-performance JSON APIs and how it was planned to be achieved. It's something I found useful to read before implementing new API, but I can remove it.

Reviewer: I think its good to link to it. I would just update the text to be announcement (since it doesn't really talk much about the actual performance characteristics)

```suggestion
* announcement: https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/issues/33115
```

Reviewer: For some reason, my response to this comment disappeared, so adding it again :)

Its perfectly fine to add a link to the announcement. I just thought it didn't make sense to label it as "performance" specifically since there isn't any concrete performance related metrics/measurements in the announcement.

Labeling it announcement makes sense, imo.
```suggestion
* announcement: https://github.com/dotnet/corefx/issues/33115
```

* spans: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/magazine/mt814808.aspx

`Json.NET` and its advantages:

> * XPath https://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/

Reviewer: Maybe link to `JToken` as well?

* LINQ https://www.newtonsoft.com/json/help/html/LINQtoJSON.htm
* XML https://www.newtonsoft.com/json/help/html/ConvertJsonToXml.htm

> `System.Json` using similar concepts:

Reviewer: I wouldn't point to this API in the spec since this was mainly added for compatibility and isn't really something we use or want to advertise. It isn't part of the JSON stack and isn't future-facing.

> System.Json.dll is part of Silverlight and doesn't ship in the .NET Framework, nor do we encourage its usage. But

Author: Ok, I put it as something we can compare our API with, but I can remove it.

Reviewer: Its fine to look at it, but I wouldn't put too much value in comparing our API to it. If you would like to do a comparison, Newtonsoft.Json (and JToken/JsonObject/etc.) is a much better candidate.

What type of comparison were you thinking off?

Author: I just put it to remember that there is such a library, but you are right that probably comparing to it doesn't make that much sense.
